High blood pressure (hypertension)
  
 Overview
High blood pressure (hypertension) is often called a silent killer because you can have it for years without knowing it. In fact, about 50 million Americans have high blood pressure, but about 30 percent of them don't know it.
Blood pressure is determined by the amount of blood your heart pumps and the amount of resistance to blood flow in your arteries. Your blood pressure normally varies during the day. It can even vary slightly with each beat of your heart. It increases during activity and decreases with rest.
Many people may not view high blood pressure as life-threatening. But uncontrolled high blood pressure can increase your risk of serious health problems. Fortunately, high blood pressure can be detected with a simple test — and once you know you have high blood pressure, you can work with your doctor to control it.
 
Signs and symptoms
Most people with high blood pressure have no signs or symptoms, but people often think that headaches, dizziness or nosebleeds are common warning signs and symptoms of high blood pressure. It's true that a few people with early-stage high blood pressure have a dull ache in the back of their heads when they wake in the morning. Or perhaps they have a few more nosebleeds than normal.
Headaches, dizziness or nosebleeds typically don't occur until high blood pressure has reached a more advanced stage — one that's possibly life-threatening. Even so, most people with the highest blood pressure readings don't experience any of these symptoms.
Other signs and symptoms sometimes associated with high blood pressure generally are caused by other conditions that can lead to high blood pressure. Such signs and symptoms include:
  Excessive perspiration 
  Muscle cramps 
  Weakness 
  Frequent urination 
  Rapid or irregular heartbeat (palpitations) 
 
Causes
The more blood your heart pumps and the narrower your arteries, the higher your blood pressure. A blood pressure reading consists of two numbers:
  The top number indicates systolic pressure. This is the amount of pressure your heart generates when pumping blood out through your arteries. 
  The bottom number indicates diastolic pressure. This is the amount of pressure in your arteries when your heart is at rest between beats. 
The most recent guidelines for high blood pressure were issued in the Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC) and published in the Journal of the American Medical Association in May 2003. The JNC represents a coalition of leaders from 46 professional, public, voluntary and federal health care agencies, including the American College of Cardiology, the American Diabetes Association, the American Heart Association, the American Public Health Association, the American Society of Hypertension, and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. According to these guidelines, blood pressure for adults is classified as follows:
  Normal blood pressure. Your blood pressure is normal only if it's below 120/80 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), but some data indicate that 115/75 mm Hg should be the new gold standard. Once your blood pressure rises above that threshold, your risk of cardiovascular disease may begin to increase. 
  Prehypertension. Prehypertension is a systolic pressure ranging from 120 to 139 or a diastolic pressure ranging from 80 to 89. If your blood pressure is right at 120/80, you have prehypertension — your blood pressure isn't normal or optimal. 
  Stage 1 hypertension. This includes a systolic pressure ranging from 140 to 159 or a diastolic pressure ranging from 90 to 99. 
  Stage 2 hypertension. The most severe hypertension, this includes a systolic pressure of 160 or higher or a diastolic pressure of 100 or higher. 
Only one of the numbers — the top or the bottom — needs to be high for you to have prehypertension or hypertension.
In 90 percent to 95 percent of high blood pressure cases, there's no identifiable cause. This type of high blood pressure is called essential hypertension or primary hypertension. It differs from secondary hypertension, in which the increased pressure results from another underlying condition, such as:
  Kidney disease 
  Adrenal disease 
  Thyroid disease 
  Abnormal blood vessels 
  Preeclampsia — high blood pressure and protein in the urine after the 20th week of pregnancy 
  Sleep apnea 
Certain medications, including birth control pills, cold remedies, decongestants, over-the-counter pain relievers and some prescription drugs, may also cause secondary hypertension.
Although acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) was once considered very safe, researchers reported in September 2005 that regular use of higher doses may increase the risk of secondary hypertension. Researchers studied 5,000 women who didn't have high blood pressure when the studies began. Women who took an average of 500 milligrams or more of acetaminophen daily over several years were more likely to develop high blood pressure than were women who didn't take any acetaminophen. It's not known if the same holds true for men since they weren't included in this study. The women were part of two phases of the Nurses' Health Study, a study of more than 200,000 nurses that began in 1976 and still continues.
Illegal drugs, such as cocaine and amphetamines, can also increase blood pressure.
Secondary hypertension may have a more rapid onset and cause higher blood pressure than does primary hypertension, which tends to develop gradually over many years.
 


Risk factors
There are four major risk factors for high blood pressure that you can't control. They are:
  Age. Your risk of high blood pressure increases as you get older. 
  Race. High blood pressure occurs far more frequently in blacks than in any other racial group in the United States. High blood pressure in blacks generally develops at an earlier age than it does in whites. Plus, it's more likely to lead to serious complications such as stroke or heart attack. 
  Sex. In young adulthood and early middle age, high blood pressure is more common in men than in women, but the opposite is true for men and women age 60 and older. 
  Family history. High blood pressure tends to run in families. 
The risk factors you can control or manage include:
  Obesity. The greater body mass you have, the more blood you need to supply oxygen and nutrients to your tissues. The volume of blood circulated through your blood vessels increases and creates extra force on your artery walls. In addition, fat cells produce chemicals that circulate and affect your blood vessels and heart. 
  Inactivity. Lack of physical activity increases your risk of high blood pressure by increasing your risk of being overweight. Inactive people also tend to have higher heart rates. Their heart muscles have to work harder with each contraction, increasing the force on the arteries. 
  Tobacco use. The chemicals in tobacco can damage the lining of your artery walls, causing the arteries to accumulate fatty deposits that contain cholesterol (plaques). Nicotine also constricts your blood vessels and forces your heart to work harder. 
  Sodium sensitivity and salt intake. People who are sodium sensitive retain sodium more easily, leading to fluid retention and increased blood pressure. 
  Low potassium intake. Potassium is a mineral that helps balance the amount of sodium in your cells. If you don't consume or retain enough potassium, you can accumulate too much sodium. 
  Excessive alcohol. Exactly how or why alcohol increases blood pressure isn't understood. But over time, heavy drinking can damage your heart muscle. 
  Stress. High levels of stress can lead to a temporary but dramatic increase in blood pressure. Stress also can promote high blood pressure if you then try to relax by eating more, using more nicotine or drinking more alcohol. 
You may also be at increased risk of high blood pressure if you have certain chronic conditions. Examples include high blood cholesterol, diabetes and sleep apnea.
High blood pressure in children, more often than in adults, indicates that something else is wrong, and the increase in blood pressure is a sign of an underlying condition. In general, high blood pressure in children is uncommon. However, as an increasing number of children become less physically active and more obese, a greater percentage of them are developing high blood pressure.


(c)Kathleen DesMaisons 2012. All rights reserved.